High-throughput DNA sequencing methods in use today are able to produce staggering amounts of data
on a daily basis that demand extensive computing resources to assemble, finish, and process genomic
information. The Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec) at Bielefeld University will soon have its own
high-throughput sequencing machine, a patented technology developed by 454 Life Sciences, which is
capable of producing millions of raw DNA bases per hour. However, what still makes sequencing a
challenge today is the subsequent computational problem of correctly assembling the reads (small
fragments of DNA data) in the correct order to build the original sequence.

This project aims to develop a novel approach to genome assembly based on a new data structure
called Dual Sparse De-Bruijn Subgraphs (DSDS). De-Bruijn subgraphs have already been employed in
several applications, including sequence assembly, and are being currently used by members of our
research group to detect repeats in incompletely sequenced genomes. The new approach consists of a
variation of our current model with a compact representation of sparse De-Bruijn subgraphs, which
exploits the redundancy due to the Watson-Crick complementarity nature of the DNA. Identifying and
avoiding duplication will double the efficiency of our current data structure, both in terms of
memory requirements and construction time, and will represent a major advantage to current assembly
methods that cannot distinguish from which strand a given sequence originates.

The project consists of two main parts. First, we will concentrate on studying the new graph in
detail, designing the necessary data structures, and building stable and efficient implementations.
These implementations will constitute the core of two genomic applications implemented in the second
part of the project as stand-alone software packages: a fully-functional genome assembler and a
repeat detection tool for incompletely sequenced genomes. The genome assembler will be used to
assemble genomic DNA data sequenced at the CeBiTec and a partner institution in Brazil, serving as a
perfect way to validate and compare our approach with other assembly methods. The repeat detection
software will be built on top of our existing implementation, which is currently based on an earlier
version of our proposed DSDS data structure. Both applications will be evaluated with the help of
biologists from the Genome Research group led by Prof. Bernd Weisshaar, in Bielefeld, and from the
group of Dr. Felipe Rodrigues da Silva at Embara, in Brazil.




